Now that we know what the Fourier transform is,
let's use it in practice.
Let's make a signal that's composed of two different sine waves,
one at two hertz and one at three hertz,
and then add some random noise to it.
Next, we're going to take the Fourier transform of the signal.
So the module we use to do Fourier transforms is the np.fft module.
Fft stands for fast Fourier transform.
The two main functions we're going to be using are rfftfreq and rfft.
Rfftfreq tells us the frequency values for which we are computing Fourier coefficients.
The Fourier coefficients are computed with the rfft function.
Fourier coefficients tell us the magnitude and
the phase of each frequency value in the signal.
The reason these functions start with an r is because we're using
specific functions that are meant for real value signals,
as opposed to complex numbers.
By examining the freqs array,
we can see that the fft samples the Fourier transform uniformly from 0 hertz to 25 hertz.
Because our signals sampling rate is at 50 hertz,
this 25 hertz is the Nyquist frequency.
The actual Fourier transform coefficients are complex numbers,
because they describe not only the magnitude of each frequency component,
but also its phase.
Most of the time, we're really only interested in the magnitude,
and so we can take the absolute value of these complex numbers and get the magnitude.
One thing to notice is that the output of
the Fourier transform is half the length of the input signal.
So our input signal is 500 samples long and our Fourier transform is 251 samples long.
This is why our frequency array increments in units of 0.1 hertz,
because we have 250 samples to span the range from 0-25 hertz.
Now, when we plot the fft,
we can see that our signal in the time domain looks
like a sum of sinusoids with a lot of noise added to it.
Then our signal in the frequency domain has two sharp spikes at two and three hertz.
Then it has a bunch of noise everywhere else,
because of the random noise we added to our signal.
So when we look at signals in the time domain,
what we mean basically is that the x-axis is in time,
and when we look at signals in the frequency domain,
the x-axis is in frequency or hertz.
Now let's change the frequencies of the sinusoids that we're adding together.
We'll make this one 2.35 hertz and this one 3.65 hertz.
If you remember, our frequencies array up here doesn't have 2.35 or 3.65,
it goes from 2.3 to 2.4.
So the main frequency component in our signal
is in between where we're sampling the Fourier transform.
So when we plot this new signal,
what we find is that we don't have the same sharp spikes at the frequency components,
instead we have these flattish spikes.
The reason for that is because there's just
no value for the Fourier transform at 2.35 hertz.
This is because, if you remember,
the output of the fast Fourier transform is half the length of the input signal.
So our input signal is just not long enough for us
to sample the Fourier transform with high enough resolution,
so that we know what the value would be at 2.35 hertz.
One way to fix this is to artificially make our signal longer,
and the way we do that is we pad it with zeros.
When we pad it with zeros,
in the time domain, it looks like this,
where we have our original signal for the first half,
and then the second half is just all flat at zeros.
In the frequency domain,
now we see sharp spikes at the frequencies of interest.
We also see this rippling behavior,
which is an artifact of zero-padding.
So there's some trade-offs that you have when you do this zero-padding.
So up here we manually padded our signal to make it longer,
but NumPy has convenience functions that do this for us.
The second argument for the fft function is this length parameter.
So we can just specify the length of the fft output that we want,
and when we do that, we see the exact same fft in the output.
So we've seen how we can take our signal from the time domain to the frequency domain.
In the next video, we'll look at going backwards,
the inverse Fourier transform.